[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
How many of you
want to throw your
hands up in the air
when the subject of
banking comes up?
Me, too.
It's no surprise
when you consider
that the banking
system we've been stuck
with for the last
couple of generations
is nothing more than
counterfeiting and double
speak.
But we can't change something
we don't understand.
To that end, I've invited
Ellen Brown, author and expert
on banking.
And your website, WebOfDebt,
is really a phenomenal resource
for people who want to
begin understanding this.
And I'm going to say right
up front, everyone listening,
you need to pay
attention because you're
going to hear a lot of
information coming at you.
And you'll probably want
to go back and watch
this a couple of times.
And we're going to go
into a little video
before you and I get started
that's a three minute
video on the nature of
banking, what banks do.
So let's watch that.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>Have you ever wondered
why there's so much debt?
Or why the experts
and authorities
seem completely unable to
solve the current debt crisis?
Well, the reason
they can't solve it
is because they're trying to fix
and repair the existing banking
system.
But the existing banking
system is completely flawed.
It's the existing system
that has buried all of us
under a massive
mountain of debt.
In the next three
minutes, I'll show you
how the design of
the banking system
guarantees that the
vast majority of people
end up in debt and why
allowing the banks to go back
to business as usual would be
the worst thing for the economy
and for society as a whole.
But first, where do you think
all this debt came from?
Many people would
assume that a bank needs
to get money from a saver before
it can make a loan to borrower.
After all, isn't
that what banks do,
taking money from people
who want to save it
and lending it to businesses
and people who need to borrow?
Well, not exactly.
Here's a fact that
not many people know:
a bank doesn't actually need to
have any real money before it
can make a loan to someone.
When you take out a
mortgage from the bank,
the bank doesn't take that money
from somebody's grandma's life
savings.
No, instead they simply
open up a computer and types
some numbers into your account.
You get a huge wad of
money in your account,
and you also get
a huge wad of debt
that you'll be repaying
over the next 25 years.
But the money that you borrowed
was created out of nothing
and just typed
into your account.
We know that's hard to believe.
But you don't need to
take our word for it.
The Bank of England
themselves say
that "when banks make loans,
they create additional bank
deposits for those that
have borrowed the money."
These bank deposits are just
the numbers in your account.
And Martin Wolf, the
chief economics editor
at "The Financial Times"
says, "The essence
of the contemporary
monetary system
is the creation of
money out of nothing
by private banks,
often foolish lending."
So almost all the money we
use today is made in this way,
out of nothing, by banks
when they make loans.
And the only way that
we, as the public,
can get our hands
on this money is
to go into debt to the banks.
In other words,
almost every pound
that we need in the economy
to run shops, businesses,
factories, schools,
and hospitals
must first be borrowed by
us from a High Street bank.
And if one person has a
million pounds, the rest of us
must be a million
pounds in debt.
If we try not to go into
debt, then the banks
would be unable to create
money, and the economy
would grind to a halt.
This is effectively a
whole scale privatization
of the power to create money.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: OK.
I think we should have at least
a somewhat better understanding
if we didn't understand
how banks function before.
That was a great little
three-minute video.
I looked at your PowerPoint.
You're getting ready to do
a sizable presentation here
pretty soon.
And one of the things I was
looking at in all the graphs
and charts and everything
is the disturbing reality
that the bottom 80% of
the world's population
controls or possesses
only 5% of the money.
>>ELLEN BROWN: Mhm.
And the top 1% possesses--
well, it depends.
Their assets are
35% of the money.
And I've forgotten what
the-- 42% was another figure.
But anyway, so there's
a huge disparity.
And the question is why is that?
If you look at a graph of
their incomes, the 1%'s
income gross has been growing
exponentially like this.
And labor, or the
ordinary-- the lower 80%,
their income, if
growing at all, is
in a straight line,
linear growth.
So what grows
exponentially in nature?
Only cancers and parasites.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS] That's
not a good analogy at all
to our economic reality.
>>BROWN: And in economics,
it's compound interest.
It grows exponentially.
So this is not sustainable.
>>REGINA: Is that-- let me
just ask you a question.
Is that because
when you're talking
about the people,
the top 1%, they're
utilizing a banking
system that is immersed
in compound banking, versus
the average person making
a wage probably has
very little invested
in any kind of
banking system at all.
So to take advantage of the
things that the wealthy can,
it's not even an option.
Is that why we're
pretty much flatliners?
We're lucky if we can
just kind of get by?
>>BROWN: Well, I'm not quite
sure what your question is.
But most people think
that if they don't borrow,
they're not paying interest.
But that's not true.
35% of everything
we buy is interest.
And those are the figures
of Margaret Kennedy, who
is a German researcher, and
she has collated numbers
from every level of production.
So you have all these
different contributors
to the production of a product.
And they all tend to finance
their contribution on credit
because they have to pay for
their workers and materials
before they have
a product to sell.
And even when the
product's ready,
they have to wait
90 days, typically,
for-- it's 90 days net.
That's how their end buyer pays.
So there's this
long spread of time
when they use a credit line.
Or, I actually know a small
businessman in that position.
And he used to have
an 8% credit line.
They canceled that because
of the whole problem
of small businesses
getting credit these days.
And now he has to use
a 16% credit card.
>>REGINA: 16% card?
>>BROWN: Yes.
So that's doubled his interest.
>>REGINA: How can
you do business?
>>BROWN: Yeah.
Well, that's the problem.
>>REGINA: You can't do business.
>>BROWN: That's
what he's saying.
>>REGINA: And this
is true for a lot
of small to mid-size
business people right now?
>>BROWN: Yeah.
So if you add up
all that interest,
then 35% of everything
we buy goes to interest.
Another interesting
figure is that 29%
of all corporate profits
go to the financial sector.
And what did they do?
Really they're just middlemen.
>>REGINA: Flooded in money.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
So you could deduce
from that-- and this
is the argument I was
making in this PowerPoint--
that if we the people
owned the banks,
or if banking and credit
were public utilities, then
that interest would
go back to the public.
So what could you do with that?
Either we could get products.
We'd be 50% richer, in effect,
because your products would
only cost 2/3 as much.
So you could buy three
products for the price of two.
Or if you calculate
that all out,
we could save a trillion
dollars annually.
So that means we would
have plenty-- collectively.
So we would have plenty of
money to do all those services
that they've told us that
we have to privatize.
If we actually
nationalized the banks,
we could have all those
services and things to spare.
Or we could eliminate
income taxes.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now everybody's
ears are perked up.
Eliminating income taxes
because most of our income taxes
go to pay, essentially,
the interest
on the debt of the country.
Right?
>>BROWN: Right.
Income taxes in 2011 were
$1.1 trillion, collectively.
Of that, $454 billion
went to pay interest
on the federal debt.
So let's assume that
we had been borrowing
from our own central
bank all along,
as has been done by
Canada, for example,
did it from 1939 to 1974.
Their debt did not go up.
They funded all kinds
of remarkable things.
That's when they put in
their medical system, which
was, at that time, was an
excellent health care system.
It's gone downhill now because
they've gone into debt.
Because they quit doing
what they did for those,
whatever-- 35 years or so.
So we could do that, borrow
from our own central bank.
Right now, the Federal Reserve
rebates all its profits
to the government.
Most people don't know that.
And the Federal
Reserve doesn't really
talk about it because
they were sort of strong
armed into doing it.
It was in the
1960s, Wright Patman
was head of the House Banking
and Currency Committee.
And he was trying to
get them nationalized.
He said you all are
printing our money
and charging us interest for it.
He said that's not right.
And so he was trying to
nationalize the Federal
Reserve, which, you know, is
actually composed of 12 Federal
Reserve branches, all
of which are 100% owned
by the banks in their district.
So to avoid that, they agreed
to rebate their profits
to the government.
So now, the bonds that the
Feds had bought, the securities
that the Fed holds, it returns
the interest to the government.
>>REGINA: So the bottom
line for the consumer,
for the bottom 80%
of us is-- and I
want to go into the
history a little bit, too,
of how we ended up
in this situation.
Because it sounds to me, what
you're talking about, just
talking about your
friend, who's having
to put whatever
aspect of his business
he's having to put on
his credit card at 16%,
now that's going to be
passed along to the consumer
ultimately.
I mean, we look at the inflation
happening and a lot of people
put articles out, some of them
conspiracies, some of them
are actually quite right
on as to why that might be.
But there are many factors
that are coming into play
as to the increase
in price of goods.
So let's go back--
>>BROWN: Can I-- I just
wanted to-- quick--
>>REGINA: Yes, please.
>>BROWN: So that was $454
billion on the federal debt.
Then there's $750 billion that
the banks collect in interest.
So let's assume
hypothetically-- it
wouldn't be easy to
nationalize the whole system.
But let's assume
hypothetically that banking
were a public
utility like water,
like highways, et cetera.
So the profits would
go back to the people.
That way, if you add
the 750 and the 454,
you get more than the
$1.1 trillion that
we're paying in income taxes.
So you could either
eliminate income taxes,
or you could have
an extra trillion
to play with, to do
all sorts of services
that we desperately need.
>>REGINA: It makes total sense.
I mean, you've been talking
about this for quite a while.
And there are other
examples where this already
exists that we're going to get
into, even one in the United
States in the case of one
state, which you use as a really
wonderful example
of what could happen
if we went that way as a nation.
Do you mind going back and doing
over a little bit of history
here.
Let's start way back,
more toward the beginning
of the United States.
Would you want to go pre War
of 1812, post War of 1812?
Where do you want to begin?
But we have to put Alexander
Hamilton in the mix somewhere.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
Well, I would go back to 1691.
That was when the
colonists came up
with this rather brilliant
system of just funding
their government
by printing money.
I mean, today printing
money has a bad name
because everybody thinks,
oh, hyperinflation.
And we're going
into hyperinflation.
But the way they did
it then, the choices
were to borrow from the British
bankers, who were not actually
lending gold.
They were lending
paper money that
was supposedly backed by gold.
So you were still just
borrowing some money
that was just
created by somebody.
But it was created by
the banks privately.
So the alternative
was for the government
to issue these paper
credits and pay
for goods and services,
workers, and materials.
And then because these
were things, like,
it started out it
was a little war
that the governor of
Massachusetts had to fund.
And he couldn't find
anyone to borrow from.
So he just issued these
little paper receipts
to the soldiers
that basically said,
you know, you have delivered
x amount of service
to the community, and
the community owes you,
and you can spend those little
receipts in the community.
And then they
circulated as money.
And they retained their value
because they were accepted back
as taxes.
California tried to do that
recently, issue warrants.
But they wouldn't take
them back in taxes.
So it's like, you
can take our IOUs,
but we're not going
to take them back.
So of course it didn't work.
>>REGINA: Did that with Bosnia
on the currency recently.
I could buy it, but I couldn't
sell it back to the Bosnians.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Well, OK.
And right here, I brought
these because they're so fun.
We have these little-- they're
antiqued reproductions.
Here's one.
One of them is from the
state of Massachusetts.
Here it is, state
of Massachusetts,
as a matter of fact, for $8.
So what are these?
Another one here
is in shillings.
These are little
certificates that--
>>BROWN: All right.
Well these were actually later.
So this one's issued 1780.
So that's like 100
years later, and that
would be during the
Revolutionary War.
And now one problem
with these was
that they were issued-- these
particular ones-- is that they
were issued as promissory notes.
In other words, they say that
the government will pay you
in gold basically when the
Revolutionary War is over.
So they weren't actually
legal tender in themselves.
And so at the end
of the war, that's
where we get into the
Alexander Hamilton problem.
They owed all this
money that they
wouldn't have had to owe if
they had paid in legal tender,
in straight fiat money.
And plus, of course, they
owed the French in gold.
And the French weren't going
to take these pieces of paper.
So that's why
Hamilton had to set up
this bank on the British
model, where they took all
the gold that the
government did have.
And then they issued 10 times
that many notes, banknotes.
And everybody took
them because they
thought they were
redeemable in gold.
So it worked very well.
And they actually got the
economy back on its feet.
But what it did was
it put us all in debt
for the last 200 years.
We've been in debt to
this banking system
that we didn't have
to be in debt to.
>>REGINA: So we're still into
that fractionalized banking
system.
And then what happened?
Because I showed
you this off camera.
So now we have some notes here,
$5 notes, from the War of 1812.
So in taking a look at these,
you said there was a problem.
This is where something
else historical
occurred around these notes.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
Hamilton set up
the first US bank.
And originally it was 80%
percent publicly owned.
But in the end, the whole
thing wound up being privatized
and largely to the
British bankers,
which is what they didn't want.
>>REGINA: But his
intention was that it
would be publicly owned?
Was that the intention?
>>BROWN: Yeah.
He actually was opposed
to privatizing it.
But because they
needed the money,
they wound up
selling the shares.
And Jefferson was opposed
to this bank all along.
And so he was instrumental
in getting the charter
not being renewed
when it expired.
But then the War
of 1812 came along,
and nobody really knows
what it was about.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
What was it about?
>>BROWN: Well,
allegedly, rumor has it,
it was created by the
bankers to put us in debt.
The British bankers
wanted their colony back.
And so that's what
war is always about,
or that is a factor
always in war,
is that the bankers, the
international bankers,
the big bankers,
fund both sides.
And everybody gets in debt.
And then that's how they capture
you in this debt machine.
>>REGINA: And that's right up to
modern day as a matter of fact.
That practice hasn't changed.
>>BROWN: So then Madison
had to set up the second US
bank in order to do the
same thing over again,
where they would do
fractional reserve lending.
And then Andrew Jackson-- I
mean that bank was seriously
corrupt.
And Andrew Jackson
shut that one down.
And then we had a whole
period of free banking.
But it didn't work out well.
There were all
these wildcat banks
that would actually issue
10 times as many banknotes
as you had gold.
I was fairly reasonable.
But the wildcat banks
would do worse than that.
They would just issue
an issue, and they
had nothing backing it.
And when people
figured that out,
they would all rush to cash
in their banknotes at once.
And there would be
a run on the banks.
a banking crisis.
And that happened, on
average, every six years
for the entire 19th
century leading up
to the-- that was the excuse
for the Federal Reserve.
>>REGINA: The establishment
of the Federal Reserve.
Yes.
>>BROWN: In there there
was the-- in the Civil War,
Lincoln went back to what
the colonists had done, which
was just issue paper
outright, issue money to pay
for part of the war.
He didn't fund the
entire war that way.
But it worked very
well, the greenbacks.
And the North managed
to win the war.
And also with that extra money
added to the money supply,
they funded the railroads.
I mean that was his big
contribution to commerce
was getting this railroad all
the way across the country.
And there were many
other developments.
I mean, business was
booming during that time
because there was extra money
around to conduct it with.
But of course then he
passed away, or, sorry,
was assassinated.
Yes, passed away violently.
>>REGINA: In an untimely manner.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
Right.
But following the greenbacks,
which I think was 1862,
there was the National
Banking Act of 1863
and then another one in 1865.
And in that system,
the idea was to try
to get the banks
on a stable system
because nobody could tell what
these bank notes were worth.
They all had the name
of the bank on it.
And the value of the
currency dwindled
as you got farther and
farther from the bank
because nobody knew
what it was going
to be worth by the time you
got to the bank to cash it.
So it was very
hard for merchants.
They had catalogs
where you could
tell which were
the sounder banks
and what your currency
was allowed to be worth.
And it was a very unstable--
>>REGINA: I was
not standardized.
Yeah.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
So the national banking
system was put in there
to try to overcome that.
The banks would then
deposit some gold
with the Treasury,
the US Treasury.
And then they were allowed
to use these bank notes,
issue these bank notes.
So it was a good idea for the
banks, the national banks,
because they still
had their gold.
But meanwhile they got to print
these notes with their names
on them.
But they said "National
Bank" at the top.
But a dollar was
then worth a dollar.
That did standardize the
value of the currency.
But they also taxed the
local banks-- or sorry,
the state banks' bank notes.
And the idea was to
try to get everybody
to be a national bank.
But the state banks, rather
than succumbing to the ta--
rather than becoming
national banks,
that was the beginning of the
whole check cashing system,
the depository system, where
they didn't use banknotes
anymore.
They were just issuing
credits that you would just
write into an account.
You would write it
in into as a deposit.
And that was very unstable.
So you had runs
on the bank again
because they would
issue many times more
credit than they
had gold to back it.
So that went right up to 1913.
And the Federal Reserve was
supposed to stabilize that.
But obviously it didn't,
because we had the biggest run
ever in 1929, 1933, that period.
>>REGINA: Let me
ask you a question.
Now we're up to
the establishment
of the Federal Reserve, which
is not federal, of course.
It's a group of men
sitting around a table,
a group of bankers.
And up to that time, at several
points in this conversation,
I'm essentially hearing you
say that the governments,
local and otherwise,
were actually
trying to put some kind of
control into the situation.
And it seems like over
and over the matter
of money kept defaulting
back into these same hands,
the banking hands.
So it's not as though the
government was necessarily
complicit and evil
in any of this.
Oftentimes they were
very much looking out
after the interest
of the people.
But that's not the
way it is today.
It seems to have been
totally co-opted into what
John Perkins calls a
corporatocracy, where
the banks run the
government now completely.
So let's talk about the
roots of that beginning,
beginning with the founding
of the Federal Reserve.
>>BROWN: The Federal
Reserve was set up
by some international
bankers, big bankers.
So it was Rockefeller, Morgan,
who were normally rivals.
But for the purpose of
this, they got together.
And it was in response to a
big banking crisis in 1907,
which rumor has it that Morgan
actually instigated himself
in order to-- they wanted
to set up this system, where
originally the Federal
Reserve printed the money
and lent it to the government
and charged interest on it.
So that was the deal
that later, in the 1960s,
that Wright Patman got all over
and said no, this is not fair,
and tried to get
it nationalized.
It should have--
everybody thought--
The opposition thought in
1913 that it was nationalized.
That was-- William
Jennings Bryan
was the leader of
the opposition.
Before that, he had been
the populist candidate
for a more nationalized
system, for a system where
the government actually
would issue the money.
And he said absolutely not.
There was no way he would
endorse a system where
private bankers would
be issuing the money
and charging us interest on it.
So they changed the name
from the Aldrich Act
to the Federal Reserve
Act, made it look federal.
And the language is so obscure.
I mean, it's still obscure.
>>REGINA: It's so obscure
that almost nobody knows.
I mean, it's shocking to
me how few people actually
know the Federal Reserve
is nothing federal at all.
>>BROWN: And it's
very hard to read.
I mean I've read it.
It's not all that long.
But it is very
hard to understand,
certain parts of it--
>>REGINA: And
you're an attorney.
>>BROWN: --exactly what
they're talking about.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
OK.
So we have that.
And then let's talk
about the gold standard.
I know you have a
completely different view
about the gold standard
than some people have
in terms of backing currencies.
So let's talk about when we
went on the gold standard,
off the gold standard,
and in your mind what
has happened to us as a result,
at least the currencies.
>>BROWN: Well, we've
been on the gold standard
ever since-- the Bank
of England came into--
was chartered in
1694, so that was
three years after the beginning
of the American colonists'
system of issuing
their own paper money.
So the Bank of England
is a privately owned--
or it was then a
privately owned bank.
It was actually nationalized
in 1946 but in name only.
It's still the same.
But anyway, that's
more complicated.
But so the Bank
of England-- well,
the king was fighting a war,
and he needed to borrow money.
And so the Bank of
England was allowed
to set up as the king's
bank, basically, that
would lend to the king
and the debt never
actually had to be paid back.
It would just keep rolling
over from year to year.
And all you really had
to pay was the interest.
I mean, that's
what we have today.
We have a $15 trillion debt
that just keeps increasing.
Everybody freaks out over
that, but it's actually
perfectly fine, because
we have a $15 trillion
dollar money supply.
In fact, the federal
debt is our money supply.
And it's only the interest
that's the problem.
And that's the thing.
>>REGINA: In the
second part, we're
going to get into this a
little more because most
people-- you're going to
have to break this down
into second grader terms for us.
>>BROWN: OK, so now I've
forgotten what the--
>>REGINA: So you were talking
about the establishment
of the gold--
>>BROWN: Oh, right.
>>REGINA: Currency of the
king and the borrowing
from the banking family.
>>BROWN: OK.
So the Bank of England was
gold-based, theoretically.
Theoretically you could redeem
these bank notes for gold,
the government could.
But they issued many
times more notes
than they had gold on the
theory that the depositors only
came for their gold 10% of
the time on the average.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BROWN: But all through
the 19th century,
you had this problem
where you had
runs on the banks
and banking crises.
It didn't work well.
And then in 1933, Roosevelt took
the US off the gold standard
because he was forced to.
Because at that time, the
dollar was 40% backed by gold.
So that meant that every time--
when you had a run the bank,
as they did then, when people
rushed into the bank to pull
out $4 worth of gold, the bank
would have to call $6 worth
of loans, because
there were actually--
>>REGINA: The ratio.
Yeah.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
So the money supply was just
collapsing in on itself.
And that's why
there was no money
to buy-- there was like
fruit falling on the ground,
and people were starving,
but there was no money
to pay for the
workers to pick it.
And there was no money to
buy the fruit at the market.
There was just a collapse
in the money supply.
So Roosevelt took the dollar off
the gold standard domestically.
But it remained on
the gold standard
internationally until 1971.
Nixon had to do the same
thing for the same reason.
The French cashed in
all their dollars.
>>REGINA: See now,
a lot of times
that is portrayed as quite
a negative or downturn
of events in the country.
But you're saying
not necessarily so.
So we're going to take a little
break for a couple minutes
so everybody can kind of
shake their brain a bit
and get ready for Part Two.
We'll be right back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Welcome back.
Ellen and I were talking
off camera a bit,
and there was one part of this
historical piece of the story
that you didn't have
a chance to address
that we want to get
into, which was really
in Benjamin Franklin's time.
And this had to do with
the colony of Pennsylvania
and a bank that was
established there.
And I've heard you talk
about this before and find
it fascinating.
So let's go to
that, and then we'll
go back to this whole
gold standard thing.
>>BROWN: OK.
This was when the colonies
were printing their own money.
It was all very experimental.
Nobody knew exactly
what would happen.
And some colonies did over-print
and hyperinflate the currency,
devalue the currency.
But in a few of
the colonies, they
had a very sustainable system.
And the ideal, the
one that perfected it,
was Pennsylvania at the
time that Benjamin Franklin
was there.
And he was called the
father of paper money
because he wrote about it and
popularized this whole system.
But what the
Pennsylvanians did that was
different was that, instead
of just printing and spending,
printing and spending,
the government
would print and lend the money.
And it would come back
to the government.
So it was called the Land Bank.
It was supposedly
backed by land,
the farmers would
take out loans,
and they would put up
their land as collateral.
Although I guess the land
was never really taken.
It was just so that they
could back it by something.
They didn't have gold.
>>REGINA: This is by faith.
Faith is part of the system.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Good faith is
part of a banking system,
theoretically, yeah.
>>BROWN: So say you could print
$105, or whatever they're using
and then lend $100
at 5% interest
and then spend $5 on
the government's budget.
And then you would
have $105 out there
to come back as
principal and interest.
And then you could lend
$100 again, spend the $5,
and $105 would come back
as principal and interest.
And you could do that
over and over and over,
and you would never have
to inflate the money supply
for the purpose of
paying the debt.
I mean, you could inflate it
if necessary because you're
productivity increased, and
you needed money out there.
So during the time that
that system was in place,
they had no inflation,
price inflation,
they had no government
debt, obviously,
because they just
printed the money.
And something else
good happened.
>>REGINA: Why did it crash?
I mean why did
that bank go away?
>>BROWN: It was the
King of England.
Well, the Bank of England
leaned on the king
to forbid the colonies
to print their own money.
At first they only forbade
certain colonies-- well,
it was most of them-- but the
ones that were overprinting.
>>REGINA: Doing
well without them?
No. [LAUGHS]
>>BROWN: But
Pennsylvania was allowed
to stay in operation
and some others,
because they did have
sustainable systems.
But then Benjamin
Franklin made a mistake
that others have made since.
He went to England
and argued the case.
So he said how well they
were doing and the colonies--
>>REGINA: The sleeping
dogs lie principle.
Should have left it alone.
>>BROWN: Yes.
So he was trying to argue
that all the colonies should
be able to print
their own money.
And he said that before
they were just wilderness,
and now they were
doing marvelously well.
And everybody marveled at how
they had been so productive
considering that they
started out with nothing.
And so the Bank of
England was not pleased
that the bankers then
leaned on the king
and the king forbade them
all to issue their own money.
And that supposedly
was a critical factor
in the Revolutionary War.
That then they had a
depression because they
didn't have enough money
to pay their debts.
And the farmers were
losing their farms.
And so they just went
back to printing money,
which was considered
an act of rebellion.
>>REGINA: OK.
And we can go back to the gold
standard part of the story.
I mean it's important
just kind of to tidy up
that piece of what
happened there
and why now we're even
hearing about currencies that
are emerging, governments
demanding that we go back
to some currencies that
are safe and gold-backed.
But let's tie the historical
piece in with that
and then make your
comment on that.
>>BROWN: OK.
Well, then in 1971, Nixon
had to do the same thing
that Roosevelt had done
because it worked fine
as long as nobody
came for their gold.
But in the Vietnam War,
we went heavily into debt,
and DeGaulle could see that.
And so he called our bluff and
took all his dollars-- traded
all his dollars in for gold,
which was actually paid.
But then the British tried
to do the same thing.
And that would have reduced
our gold supply so much that it
would have, you know, the
dollar would have collapsed.
>>REGINA: Yeah, valueless.
Yeah.
>>BROWN: And so Nixon took the
dollar off the gold standard.
So that system doesn't work.
The other alternative
that people
talk about when they talk about
our gold standard is 100% gold.
But that totally won't
work because there's not
enough gold.
And it's not fluid enough.
You need an expandable system.
Our entire economy
runs on credit.
It's just like the
small businessman
that pays his
workers and materials
before he has a product to sell.
Well, there's a man
who is a gold proponent
himself, Antel-- I'm
probably pronouncing his name
wrong-- Fekete.
F-E-K-E-T-E. But he's written
extensively about this,
that it was actually because of
real bills or bills of credit
that the gold system
worked at all.
But if you have
all these producers
at different levels
of production,
and they all operate
on credit, you
would have to-- the
way he calculated it,
he gave an example of a drug
that had 90 different producers
before the drug
made it to market.
It will cost $5,000 in credit
just to make a $100 product.
I mean that many loans are taken
out to make this end product.
So you're going to
have to find people
willing to lend their
$5,000 worth of gold just
to make all these products.
And the whole system
will choke when
you can't find those people.
And that's what we see in--
>>REGINA: What if,
theoretically, there
were enough gold to do
100% gold-backed currency.
What if that were the case?
Could it work?
>>BROWN: Well, if all
the gold were out there--
I mean, you have to have
an expandable money supply.
That's the point.
You can't start with a fixed
supply and keep it that way.
>>REGINA: No matter what it is.
OK.
>>BROWN: As long as you
have a debt-based system,
because you've got to
keep expanding just
to cover the debt.
And we see that in the
Eurozone, where they've
attempted to use a
fixed amount of euros.
And what happened was
everybody's in debt.
So they're all trying to
borrow from each other.
But they're all
going down together.
And the only way
they're managing
to pull out of it at all it
is that the European Central
Bank has now agreed
to print and lend
to the governments,
something that's
a violation of their
original rules.
But I mean they have to do it.
First they were
lending to the banks.
That just started
like last January.
And now they're actually
going to lend to--
with this new European
stability mechanism.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
OK, well let's talk about
the state-owned bank.
Let's talk about some
of the solutions,
then, because we looked at
Pennsylvania a moment ago.
And you said that was
actually something
that was quite viable.
But in more modern times,
we have a renegade state,
the state of North
Dakota, which decided
to take this upon themselves.
And they established the
Bank of North Dakota.
Let's talk about it, in really
plain, simple, kindergarten
terms, how that works,
why it's working,
what has happened to the
people in North Dakota,
their economic system,
compared to everybody else
during this whole downturn
since 2008 in particular.
>>BROWN: The North
Dakotans in 1919
set up their own bank,
the Bank of North Dakota.
And this is because the
farmers were losing their farms
to the Wall Street bankers.
And when they
realized that, they
decided they wanted to
keep their money local
and use their credit
for their own purposes.
So it was the
nonpartisan league.
It was neither
Republican nor Democrat.
It was not about politics.
It was about the local ec--
it was local-- it was about--
>>REGINA: Their
own preservation.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BROWN: And they had
a very fiery leader
who did great speeches.
And so they managed to set
up this bank, which has now
been in operation for 93
years or something like that
and has fought all
the-- the Supreme Court.
They've gone through
everything, and they've
got a very stable bank now,
which is very profitable.
It's returned I think $300
million in the last decade
to the state government, which
doesn't sound like a lot,
but North Dakota is 1/18 the
size of Los Angeles County.
>>REGINA: Right.
I mean, it's all
a relative scale.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
It's really the
size of a county,
of a modest-sized
county, not LA County.
So that's actually a lot
of money for their system.
They've returned almost
as much as the oil
industry has returned in taxes.
And so the beauty
of the bank-- they
did not suffer from
the credit crisis.
The state has had a very nice
surplus every year since 2008.
They have the
lowest default rate
in the country, the lowest
unemployment rate, the lowest
foreclosure rate.
The Bank of North Dakota
partners with the local banks,
so it allows the local banks
to make loans that they just
otherwise couldn't.
It's a way of getting around
this capital requirement, which
is imposed from
abroad and I would
argue is designed to keep a--
>>REGINA: Keep a stranglehold.
>>BROWN: Yeah, exactly.
>>REGINA: OK.
So let's talk about if we were--
let's talk about the state
of California, now the seventh
largest economy in the world,
and establishing a state-owned
bank; how that would work
once it's established;
what is given
back by way of infrastructure,
services to the people,
and so forth; and, again, in
kindergarten terms for us.
How would we do this?
Because you're a big proponent
of state-owned banks.
How do you do it with
something as unwieldy
as the state of California?
What's that look like?
>>BROWN: Well, it would look
pretty good in California,
I think, because California
has a huge amount of assets.
>>REGINA: Boy, does it.
>>BROWN: We have $70 billion
in a treasurer's pool that's
just sitting there
doing nothing.
>>REGINA: But wait a minute.
They argue the state's broke.
They're shutting down parks.
What do you mean?
Right?
>>BROWN: [LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Tell us
the truth about that.
Yeah.
People don't know this.
>>BROWN: Well, there
are all these agencies
and local governments that
have-- all their extra money
is put into funds, which are in
the nature of rainy day funds.
But they don't want to share
with each other necessarily,
and they don't want to give
it back to the general fund.
And whenever the
governor has tried
to get the money
to pay the budget,
then-- well I know
there was a case where
they tried to get-- Governor
Schwarzenegger tried
to get the highway fund money.
And somebody took him to court.
And the court said, no,
that this was for highways.
It was earmarked for
highways, and you
couldn't use it for your budget.
So all that money is
just sitting there.
Right now it's in
a treasurer's pool.
There's other money
besides this $70 billion.
But those agencies that want
to use the treasurer's pool,
that money is $70 billion.
It's earning 0.49% right now.
So it's earning almost nothing.
And it never gets spent.
You can look at a chart
of this whole fund,
and it's done nothing
in the last 10 years.
>>REGINA: If someone wanted to
take it on and do some research
and look it up, what do
they do a Google search on?
>>BROWN: You can look at
the treasurer's website.
>>REGINA: OK
>>BROWN: And he's
got it in there.
It's called the Treasurer's
Investment Pool.
>>REGINA: Treasurer's
So there's a $70,000
of money sitting there.
>>BROWN: $70 billion.
>>REGINA: $70
billion sitting there
that's not being
utilized at this time
while they argue with each
other every summer about all
the shortfalls and which
programs are going to be axed.
And education
takes the first hit
usually, and on and on and on.
I mean that seems rather
immoral, to say the least.
>>BROWN: But how do you
get around this rule
that you can't spend
that rainy day money?
In North Dakota,
that money would all
be deposited in the
Bank of North Dakota.
So what a bank could do
that nobody else can do,
what a charter bank
is allowed to do,
is to lend their money, even
though it's still in deposit.
So they basically
double the money.
So you could take
that $70 billion.
It's still sitting there.
You could still pay them 0.49%.
You could pay them
more than that.
>>REGINA: And they become a
depositor into the state bank.
All those accounts, those pools,
are deposited into state bank?
>>BROWN: Mhm.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>BROWN: And then,
well, ideally you
would use a little for
your capital requirement,
but there are other ways to
raise the capital if there's
some objection to that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, but we're just
doing the kindergarten version.
>>BROWN: OK.
So
>>REGINA: We can understand it.
>>BROWN: Right.
You take your $70
billion and lend it.
One thing you could do is to
just buy plain old government
bonds.
You know how when
they do infrastructure
they issue these bonds?
>>REGINA: Bonds.
Yeah.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
And that's how they
fund the infrastructure.
So we are paying-- I
think in California
the outstanding revenue
infrastructure type bonds is
$155 billion in debt right now.
Of that, $70 billion
was interest.
So if you had funded your own
bonds through your own bank,
if the government had,
we would be $70 billion
richer in California now.
So that's one simple way to
do it is just buy the bonds,
fund your own bonds instead of--
>>REGINA: From your own bank.
>>BROWN: --instead
of putting yourself
at the mercy of this very
voracious bond market, where
you have to get interest rate
swaps, which is what has broken
Oakland and other cities that
have fallen for this Wall
Street scam.
So if you just lend
to yourself, you
can eliminate the interest,
which is 35-- well,
it's actually 40% of public
projects is interest.
Or you could partner
with the local banks,
like they do in North Dakota,
and expand the lending
possibility of the local banks.
So my friend who is
now paying 16% interest
could be paying the 8%.
He could have his
credit line again.
They would have
that-- the wherewithal
to make the loans
it used to make.
>>REGINA: Let's
talk about Japan.
I heard you in an
interview recently talking
about what Japan has been
doing and the way in which they
interface with this subject,
which has some similarities.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
Japan is considered-- they have
the worst debt-to-GDP ratio
of any major country
in the world.
And everybody thinks,
oh, the poor Japanese.
I think they have something
like 220% of the GDP is debt.
But in fact, the debt
is to themselves.
They have borrowed from
their own central bank
and from their own
Japan Post Bank, which
is a government-owned bank.
Japan Post Bank is where--
>>REGINA: Which is like aligned
with the postal service?
>>BROWN: Yeah.
It is the postal service.
But they also have
banking services.
And it's where the people
deposit their money.
So the interest on the federal
debt is going to the people.
It is their pension basically.
It's sort of like a dividend for
saving and for being Japanese.
So all the money is
staying in Japan.
They don't owe it to
foreign creditors.
And meanwhile,
they have-- they're
at the top of the market
for all these electronics.
And I mean their export
business is huge.
They're doing very, very well.
But they've sort of
hidden behind this debt
to GDP ratio thing.
>>REGINA: Because
they don't want
the rest of the world
to know exactly?
>>BROWN: Well, there's a lot
of written out there about how
World War II was actually--
I mean if you want to get
into conspiracy theories--
>>REGINA: Just a little bit.
>>BROWN: --that both Germany
and Japan were doing great
during the '30s
because they were just
printing their own money.
And so it was to bring them
down that-- World War II,
whether it was designed that way
or not, it did bring them down.
And so the Japanese could
see that if they wanted
to survive in this
system, they had
to be a little more discreet.
They couldn't just print.
So they borrowed
from their own bank
so it looked like
they were in debt.
But in fact, they were
in debt to themselves.
So they're still just printing.
But they're printing debt.
>>REGINA: But what
they're doing is smart.
And we should be taking note.
Let's talk about other
countries who have already
implemented the same kind
of banking in the past.
And there is-- and
I would like to get
to it if we have a chance--
there are some articles that
are starting to pop up about
a new kind of bank that
is specifically
investment oriented
banks for small and
medium sized businesses,
how we have a need for this now.
But let's talk about
Germany, for example,
and anywhere else
that has already
implemented this
kind of banking.
>>BROWN: In Germany
and Japan, they
have systems that are--
it's alternative banking
or public banking where they're
designed to serve the economy
and to serve the businesses,
rather than our type of banking
is designed to extract interest.
And so it's all
based on collateral,
which means only the
rich can get loans.
If you don't have
the collateral,
you can't get thee loan.
If you just have a good business
idea, you can't get a loan,
but in Germany and Japan--
Well, Japan's model is--
they're called keiretsu, where
you have a group of corporations
that own their own bank.
And so the bank funds
the corporations,
advances credit to
the corporations.
And they all put their
deposits in the bank.
And so they're really
borrowing from themselves.
>>REGINA: It's a
closed loop again.
>>BROWN: Mhm.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BROWN: And in Germany,
it's the same deal,
where the public
banks are designed
to serve the businesses.
They take the long view.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK.
So we have that.
And then we have the reflections
on the Bank of North Dakota.
And yet we can't seem
to find our way out
of this, because there seems
to be some resistance, which
could have something
to do with the fact
that the largest lobbying
group on Capitol Hill
happens to be the
banking industry.
Could that have
anything to do with why
we're not seeing these changes?
>>BROWN: Right.
Completely.
>>REGINA: You've been
speaking about this for years.
And others are on
board with you on this.
And we can, I think just
from the little bit you've
explained, we can
see the logic in it.
But it's not happening.
>>BROWN: Well, the federal
level is locked up.
The banks own Congress.
That's been said and
that seems to be true.
But on this local level, there
are still things you could do.
The cities and the
counties are run
by a handful of
commissioners or councilmen.
And they're approachable.
And you could talk to them.
And so they could
very quietly-- this
is what I envision happening--
is this very quiet sort
of grassroots movement
where they just set up--
you could call it
something else,
like Washington state is
calling it an investment trust.
If you call it a public bank
you might be bringing down
the ire of the bankers.
But what you need is
a financial system
that serves the people,
where the profits go back
to the people.
And that is a
sustainable system.
And the model's been proven
globally and historically.
It's just that it's
always defeated
by the big international cartel
that is more powerful and more
based on this extractive
model of extracting interest.
>>REGINA: And so
some of the articles
I've read recently--
there are only a couple.
They're just starting to surface
about some nebulous new banking
system coming up.
Francois Holland, the
new president in France,
is calling for it
and saying they're
going to roll their
public bank, which
is going to be for the
purpose of investing
in small to mid-size businesses.
They're going to be
rolling this model out
to help get the people back on
their feet again and to work.
But what I'm reading
is that, as you say,
this is not collateral-
or asset-backed lending.
The lending would be based
on cash flows of a company.
And there's a big
distinction here.
OK, so let's use an example.
Let's say your town does not
have a dog grooming parlor.
And you love dogs.
You know how to do
this thing, and you
want to set up a dog
grooming business.
And you're going to
the bank to say, hey,
I want to do my dog
grooming business.
What's the bank going to look
at under the current model,
the restrictive model,
versus that other new model?
>>BROWN: Well, they'll
look at your buildings
and your physical
assets that they
can attach when you default.
And they're probably
expecting you to default.
I mean, that's--
>>REGINA: So the
whole system's banking
on your failure,
no pun intended.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: They're
banking on your failure.
And then they're going to take
your stuff back and resell it?
>>BROWN: Mhm.
But the other
model has been done
globally and
historically very well.
The Chinese, the Koreans,
the whole Asian model
is where you extend
credit to your businesses
and support your businesses.
In fact, we call that a
violation of the World Trade
Organization rules.
And we say, they're cheating.
They're supporting
their businesses
by letting them-- well, they're
called nonperforming loans.
But the way the Chinese did it,
they had no intention of-- they
don't call it-- these
are grants basically.
They're just supporting
their export business.
>>REGINA: But isn't it more
of a genuine partnership
where the lender is looking
to help sustain the health
and longevity of a business?
And that is not what we've been
doing, certainly in the United
States, for quite a long time.
The industry hasn't
been doing it.
>>BROWN: Right.
That's the German model,
the Japanese model.
It's the Islamic
model, usary-free--
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about Islamic banking.
There you're talking about
essentially a lack of interest,
no pun intended.
There is no interest.
[BOTH LAUGH]
There's no interest.
But there is a fee.
Can you explain how
Islamic banking works?
Some people have heard
about this already.
>>BROWN: Well, from
what I've read,
they're still experimenting.
It was in the Koran that
interest is forbidden.
But it wasn't really
tried on a national level
until Iran became a
religious state in the 1970s.
And that's where most of the
big Islamic banks are right now.
But some critics, like
some Islamic clerics,
say that they're cheating
and that they're really
getting interest by other means.
Because what they do is,
say if they make a loan,
they double the
price of the house.
So you pay twice as much
over the time of the loan.
>>REGINA: Is that true?
I mean, from what you've
been able to tell?
>>BROWN: Some.
I haven't heard of a
really good, effective,
interest-free model yet.
So that's why I like
the public banking model
where you charge
interest, which is
a way of-- If you have
a 4% default rate,
you're going to have to
charge 4% interest just
to make up for the defaults or
you're going to go bankrupt.
So I like the model of
the interest going back
to the people, either
as a cooperative model
or as a public model,
which seems to me
overcomes any ethical
objections but still
is a sustainable system.
>>REGINA: So going back for just
a moment to the person who--
so let's say this person
applying for their loan
to start their dog
grooming business
doesn't have a building.
Now under this
other model you're
talking about, say if
it's a state-owned bank,
and if we're looking at
not lending money based
on assets but on cash flow,
how would a little business
like that work within
this closed loop
model you're talking
about, a locally owned
or state owned banks?
>>BROWN: You would still
need some sort of record
to show that you had
a cash flow, that you
were going to produce something.
Even in North Dakota, we have
a retired Bank of North Dakota
man on our advisory
board, and he
says we are not
development people.
We do not fund businesses
that are going to go bankrupt.
We're bankers, and we look at
the viability of the business
as anyone else would.
In fact, more so than
banks in other states,
which were selling their
loans off to investors
so they don't care whether the--
>>REGINA: Business fails.
>>BROWN: Right.
>>REGINA: That makes sense.
So you're entering
into a partnership.
>>BROWN: It is a partnership.
They want the business to
succeed because they're
going to keep that
loan on their books.
And they don't want
it going into default.
>>REGINA: Well let's go
into more personal levels.
People watching this have
feelings about all of this.
And one segment, a big
segment now, feels,
let them crash and burn.
These are horrible practices.
We've been enslaved to
our monetary systems.
Our government's enslaved,
our politicians are enslaved.
So let them crash and burn.
What's the reality
of the banking system
crashing and burning from
a pragmatic point of view?
>>BROWN: Well, the
too big to fail
banks really are too
big to just let them go.
Instead of-- I mean, they've
got their little tentacles
in everything globally.
I would feel quite nervous .
You couldn't travel anymore.
What are you going to
use for your Visa card?
But they are not too
big to nationalize.
I mean, that would
be the solution
it seems to me is we the
people should take them over.
Keep the bank.
Change the name.
And make it ours.
>>REGINA: What do we, if we're
part of the 80% on the bottom,
most of us, and almost
everybody watching
is probably part of
the 80% on the bottom.
What do we do now?
I mean, what do we do
with whatever money
we may still have?
Are their choices?
Do you stay with the big
privately owned banks?
Do you find other little
local credit unions?
What do we do with our money?
>>BROWN: That is difficult.
It depends on who you are.
Credit unions are a
great idea, of course.
And that is a cooperative model.
But there are limitations
to a credit union.
And if you have your own small
business, you may find, I mean,
I've heard people say that
they just can't work well.
In fact, I know-- there are
several cities in California
that were talking about
moving their money out
of Wall Street into local banks.
And the credit unions are
not big enough for that.
>>REGINA: So can we use
established local banks?
Can they come on board?
Are they allowed to come on
board with a, say a mandate
or request on
behalf of the people
to start serving in
this public capacity?
Do they have the
right to do that?
>>BROWN: I guess I
don't understand.
>>REGINA: If you have
a local bank, OK?
Not a B of A or something, but
a local bank that's established,
can they go into partnership
with that community
to become more of the
model you're talking about?
>>BROWN: Well, in
North Dakota, it's
the bank of North
Dakota that allows
these small banks to expand and
take on a lot more deposits.
>>REGINA: So we have
to lobby on a larger
level it's sounding like.
>>BROWN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: We do.
>>BROWN: Well, yeah.
The first thing-- you either
have to go to your-- approach
your legislator-- but local.
Go local.
We don't have time
to go into the county
bank possibilities
I don't think.
>>REGINA: No, we don't.
>>BROWN: But you could
fix the real estate--
>>REGINA: Problem
in no time flat.
>>BROWN: --problems
with county banks.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: So OK.
So it sounds like
we have to-- again,
it always comes back to
personal responsibility, right?
[LAUGHS] There's no
easy one on this one.
But we do have to take action
in terms of if this is something
that's appealing, it
sounds like we really need
to start approaching
the interests that
matter on a local level and then
start taking it up from there.
And we're out of time.
I so much appreciate
your being here
and giving us a
little bit of a better
understanding of the
complexity of the system
and how we can fix it.
>>BROWN: Yeah, thanks, Regina.
>>REGINA: I hope this has
been beneficial in helping
you understand the
creation of money.
And the good news is that new
systems, even new currencies,
are going to be birthed to
help us get back on our feet
as a species.
But it's going to
take some time.
Meanwhile, you do have
choices as to what
to do with your money, as
Ellen's just pointed out.
You have to research a bit.
We each have to become
our own advocates
in terms of what we
choose to support.
And it sounds like it
needs to start politically.
So until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]